.. meta::
   :description: Use poldantic to derive Polars schemas from Pydantic models, then convert the resulting DataFrames to model instances with arrowmodel.

.. _how-to-use-with-poldantic:

How to Use with Poldantic
==========================

`poldantic <https://github.com/eddiethedean/poldantic>`_ bridges Pydantic models
and Polars schemas. It can derive a Polars schema from a Pydantic model
(``to_polars_schema``) or generate a Pydantic model from a Polars schema
(``to_pydantic_model``). arrowmodel completes the round trip by converting
Polars DataFrames back into Pydantic model instances.

**Prerequisites:** ``poldantic``, ``polars``, and ``arrowmodel`` installed.

Model-first: Pydantic model to Polars schema and back
------------------------------------------------------

When your Pydantic model is the source of truth, use ``to_polars_schema`` to
create DataFrames that match your model, then arrowmodel to convert back:

.. code-block:: python

   import polars as pl
   from poldantic import to_polars_schema
   from arrowmodel import ArrowModel


   class User(ArrowModel):
       id: int
       name: str
       score: float


   # Derive a Polars schema from the Pydantic model
   schema = to_polars_schema(User)
   # {'id': Int64, 'name': String, 'score': Float64}

   # Create or read a DataFrame using that schema
   df = pl.DataFrame(
       {
           "id": [1, 2, 3],
           "name": ["Alice", "Bob", "Carol"],
           "score": [9.5, 8.0, 7.3],
       },
       schema=schema,
   )

   # Convert back to Pydantic model instances
   users = User.convert(df)
   print(users[0].name)  # Alice
   print(users[1].score)  # 8.0

The ``schema`` dict ensures the DataFrame columns have the exact Polars types
that correspond to your model's field types, avoiding type mismatches at
conversion time.

Schema-first: Polars schema to Pydantic model
----------------------------------------------

When a Polars schema already exists (from a Parquet file, database, or shared
contract), use ``to_pydantic_model`` to generate a matching Pydantic model,
then convert with arrowmodel:

.. code-block:: python

   import polars as pl
   from poldantic import to_pydantic_model
   from arrowmodel import model_convert

   # Existing Polars schema -- perhaps from a Parquet file or a shared definition
   polars_schema = {"order_id": pl.Int64, "customer": pl.String, "total": pl.Float64}

   # Generate a Pydantic model from the schema
   Order = to_pydantic_model(polars_schema, "Order", force_optional=False)

   # Read data using that schema
   df = pl.DataFrame(
       {
           "order_id": [101, 102],
           "customer": ["Acme Corp", "Globex"],
           "total": [1500.00, 2300.50],
       },
       schema=polars_schema,
   )

   # Convert to model instances
   orders = model_convert(Order, df)
   print(orders[0].customer)  # Acme Corp

.. note::

   Models generated by ``to_pydantic_model`` are standard Pydantic ``BaseModel``
   subclasses, not ``ArrowModel`` subclasses. Use :py:func:`~arrowmodel.model_convert`
   or :py:class:`~arrowmodel.ArrowModelConverter` to convert them.

Why this works without pyarrow
------------------------------

Polars DataFrames expose the
`Arrow PyCapsule Interface <https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/CDataInterface/PyCapsuleInterface.html>`_,
the same protocol pyarrow uses. arrowmodel accepts any PyCapsule-compatible
input, so Polars DataFrames work directly -- no intermediate pyarrow conversion.

.. tip::

   The same pattern works with any Arrow-PyCapsule-compatible library:
   pyarrow, Polars, nanoarrow, and others.
